---
title: Babatunde Irukera
designation: Chief Executive
image: "/uploads/people/babatunde.jpg"
level: Directors
rank: 1
layout: person
---

Babatunde Irukera is the Chief Executive of the Consumer Protection Council (now the Federal Competition and Consumer Protection Commission). He started overseeing the transition and operationalisation of the Commission since January 30, 2019, when the Federal Competition and Consumer Protection Act was enacted. He is responsible for the daily management and leadership of the Commission in fulfilling its mandate to promote market competition, protect consumers and secure remedies when consumer rights are violated. His record of advocacy and representation in competition and consumers’ issues is exceptional and provides the clarity both the Commission, and industry need in addressing issues of customer service/protection, promoting a level playing field in the Nigerian marketplace, and ensuring regulatory stability.  He has been in active legal practice for almost three decades. His varied experience ranges from being In-house Counsel to General Counsel, Managing Partner in a law firm, and advising senior government officials as well as key government institutions. Over this diverse career, Babatunde gained considerable experience in transactions, civil rights and commercial litigation, regulatory work, government relations and practice management.  

Key areas of significant litigation and resolution experience for Babatunde include medical malpractice.  He was key counsel in prosecution, negotiation and settlement of a large multi-jurisdictional case involving a major pharmaceutical company and the conduct of a clinical trial that resulted in injuries. He also played vital roles in sector related consumer protection advancements including advising the Nigerian Civil Aviation Authority with respect to its role in sector consumer protection. He led the initiative in developing current aviation consumer protection regulations as well as the Passenger Bill of Rights. He also led the team that revised existing aviation economic regulations and superintended a comprehensive regulatory and parliamentary investigation into anti-competitive behaviour by foreign airlines. He has also provided capacity-building and advisory services to government institutions and other clients with respect to competition/antitrust issues. He co-authors the Nigerian chapters in a range of competition/antitrust related widely regarded international publications.  His unique combination of advocacy, commercial practice and reputation provides the required mutual industry/regulatory assurance and balance for a vibrant and robust consumer protection regime that promotes business stability and investment, as well consumer satisfaction and confidence.  

Babatunde was admitted to practice law before the Supreme Court of Nigeria in 1990, and before the Washington State Supreme Court in 1996. 
 