---
title: 'Dana Air: FCCPC Expresses Gratitude for Safe Evacuation, urges Transparent
  and Responsive Action '
date: 2018-02-19 12:00:00 -11:00
document: "/uploads/releases/dana.jpg"
---

Dana Airlines Flight 9J0363 operating from Abuja to Port-Harcourt on February 20th, 2018, landed at approximately 19:30hrs and overshot the runway.Cause of incident still unknown but under investigation. Aircraft damaged, Nigerian Civil Aviation Authority (NCAA) and Accident Investigation Bureau (AIB) notified and already in control. Federal Airport Authority of Nigeria (FAAN) secured perimeter scene of incident. 50 Souls On Board (SOB) made up of 44 passengers and 6 crew.

Thankfully, all passengers and crew were safely evacuated without injury. The Federal Competition and Consumer Protection Commission congratulates relevant airport and aviation authorities, as well as the airline for this safe evacuation and management of what could otherwise have been tragic.

The Council further calls for calm as we await more information and a detailed investigation by the Accident Investigation Bureau in compliance with ICAO standards.  In addition, the Council has been in communication with the airline and NCAA. The Council understands that Dana Air has provided logistic support and accommodation to passengers. The Council insists this must comply with minimum standards in accordance with prevailing Regulations under Part 19, Nigerian Civil Aviation Rules (NCAR).

An open, transparent, sensitive and responsive approach by the airline and relevant authorities is vital to sustaining confidence and assuring consumers. The Council welcomes this openness and attention to consumers, including providing medical or psychological support where necessary.

The Federal Competition and Consumer Protection Commission in collaboration with the Nigerian Civil Aviation Authority, other aviation agencies and service providers remains available to all passengers in the sector to answer questions, provide assistance and required assurances at this and other times.

Our hotlines are 08056003030 and 08056002020. Consumers may also reach the Council by email at contact@fccpc.gov.ngng and by Twitter at @cpcnig.
